Update Acceptable/Deprecating/Forks/Versions docs (#16606)
Homebrew/brew: docs/Deprecating-Disabling-and-Removing-Casks.md

# Deprecating, Disabling and Removing Casks

There are many reasons why casks may be deprecated, disabled or removed. This document explains the differences between each method as well as explaining when one method should be used over another.

## Overview

These general rules of thumb can be followed:

- `deprecate!` should be used for casks that _should_ no longer be used.
- `disable!` should be used for casks that _cannot_ be used.

> - Casks that are no longer acceptable in `homebrew/cask` or have been disabled for over a year _should_ be removed.

Author: > Use it as a temporary way to still serve the binary during the deprecation period. It would allow people to `brew extract` the final state of the cask and put it in their own tap if they really want to.

Makes sense to me 👍🏻

> - Casks that are no longer acceptable in `homebrew/cask` or have been disabled for over a year _should_ be removed.

Author: @p-linnane Can you make a wording suggestion here, I don't know what's being suggested here really.

> - Casks that are no longer acceptable in `homebrew/cask` or have been disabled for over a year _should_ be removed.

Reviewer: No wording changes needed. Just wanted us to be on the same page about using archive.org links when we deprecate casks. We seem to be in agreement.

## Deprecation

If a user attempts to install a deprecated cask, they will be shown a warning message but the install will proceed.

A cask should be deprecated to indicate to users that the cask should not be used and will be disabled in the future. Deprecated casks should continue to be maintained by the Homebrew maintainers if they continue to be installable. If this is not possible, they should be immediately disabled.

The most common reasons for deprecation are when the upstream project is deprecated, unmaintained, or archived.

Casks should only be be deprecated if at least one of the following are true:

- the cask does not install on any of our supported macOS versions

> - the cask has outstanding CVEs

Reviewer: Since we just install casks instead of having to go through trying to build them ourselves, this is acceptable on a second read. I'm not crazy about the unknown with CVE's, but people are supposed to know what they are installing so 🤷‍♂️

> - the cask has outstanding CVEs

Author: > I think we should consider including casks with "unpopular" casks here, irrespective of software support or vulnerabilities.

If they have literally zero installs: sure. If they have more than that: why remove them if they aren't causing issues? Less software in homebrew-cask makes it less useful to users.

To deprecate a cask, add a `deprecate!` call. This call should include a deprecation date (in the ISO 8601 format) and a deprecation reason:

```ruby
deprecate! date: "YYYY-MM-DD", because: :reason
```

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the project or version became (or will become) deprecated. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be deprecated, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will not become deprecated until that date. This can be useful if the upstream developers have indicated a date when the project or version will stop being supported.

Reviewer 2: The script I made also checks the commit date of the deprecation, so for disabling this would not happen.

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the project or version became (or will become) deprecated. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be deprecated, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will not become deprecated until that date. This can be useful if the upstream developers have indicated a date when the project or version will stop being supported.

Author: Backdating feels a bit weird/confusing but good to know the script checks commit dates.

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the project or version became (or will become) deprecated. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be deprecated, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will not become deprecated until that date. This can be useful if the upstream developers have indicated a date when the project or version will stop being supported.

Reviewer: Agreed that we should not backdate things. The wording here states that if known we should set the deprecation date to when the project became deprecated, which is my main issue here. If we find a project we package was deprecated a few years ago, under this wording we should immediately set the deprecation date to that date, which will blow through our entire cycle straight to removal.

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the project or version became (or will become) deprecated. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be deprecated, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will not become deprecated until that date. This can be useful if the upstream developers have indicated a date when the project or version will stop being supported.

Reviewer 3: Backdating really serves no meaningful purpose. In the end deprecation is a notice that we're going to remove the package and when we deliver that notice to end users is the most important thing. We're unlikely to shorten a deprecation cycle because we discovered upstream archived their repo a few months ago.

Even though Sean's script might check commit dates, many others do not and there's been multiple incidents of early disabling as a result - I last saw one as recent as last month.

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the project or version became (or will become) deprecated. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be deprecated, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will not become deprecated until that date. This can be useful if the upstream developers have indicated a date when the project or version will stop being supported.

Reviewer: 100% with you. It only causes problems, and should be avoided.

The `because` parameter can be a preset reason (using a symbol) or a custom reason. See the [Deprecate and Disable Reasons](#deprecate-and-disable-reasons) section below for more details about the `because` parameter.

## Disabling

If a user attempts to install a disabled cask, they will be shown an error message and the install will fail.

A cask should be disabled to indicate to users that the cask cannot be used and will be removed in the future. Disabled cask are those that could not be installed successfully any longer.

The most common reasons for disabling a cask are:

- it cannot be installed

> - it has been deprecated for a long time

Author: Yeh, this works for me 👍🏻

- the upstream URL has been removed or uses archive.org

> Popular casks (i.e. have more than 999 [analytics installs in the last 30 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/30d/)) should be deprecated for at least six months even if e.g. they do not install on all macOS versions before being disabled.
> 
> Unpopular casks (i.e. have fewer than 1000 [analytics installs in the last 30 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/30d/)) can be deprecated immediately for any of the reasons above e.g. they cannot be installed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Casks having _more than 999_ [analytics installs in the last 30 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/30d/) should be _deprecated for at least six months_ even if, e.g., they do not install on all macOS versions before being disabled.

Casks having _fewer than 1000_ [analytics installs in the last 30 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/30d/) can be _deprecated immediately_ for any of the reasons above, e.g., they cannot be installed.
```

Drop the popular/unpopular moniker. Keep it to the metrics, says I.

**Note: disabled casks in `homebrew/cask` will be automatically removed one year after their disable date.**

> Unpopular casks (i.e. have fewer than 1000 [analytics installs in the last 30 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/30d/)) can be manually removed three months after their disable date.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Casks having fewer than 1000 [analytics installs in the last 30 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/30d/) can be manually removed three months after their disable date.
```

Author: I'd actually sooner change the i.e. to an e.g. as I don't think popularity is best judged entirely on a number in our analytics.

> To disable a cask, add a `disable!` call. This call should include a deprecation date (in the ISO 8601 format) and a deprecation reason:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To disable a cask, add a `disable!` call. This call should include a deprecation date in the ISO 8601 format and a deprecation reason:
```

```ruby
disable! date: "YYYY-MM-DD", because: :reason
```

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the reason for disabling came into effect. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be disabled, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will be deprecated until that date (on which the cask will become disabled).

Author: Yeh, I believe this is the case.

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the reason for disabling came into effect. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be disabled, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will be deprecated until that date (on which the cask will become disabled).

Reviewer 2: It is, yes

There are two ways to indicate the reason. The preferred way is to use a pre-existing symbol to indicate the reason. The available symbols are listed below and can be found in the [`DeprecateDisable` module](https://github.com/Homebrew/brew/blob/master/Library/Homebrew/deprecate_disable.rb):

- `:does_not_build`: the cask cannot be installed on any supported macOS version.
- `:repo_archived`: the upstream repository has been archived and no replacement is pointed to that we can use
- `:repo_removed`: the upstream repository has been removed and no replacement is mentioned on the homepage that we can use
- `:unmaintained`: the project appears to be abandoned i.e. it has had no commits for at least a year and has critical bugs or CVE that have been reported and gone resolved longer. Note: some software is "done"; a lack of activity does not imply a need for removal.
- `:unsupported`: Homebrew's compilation of the software is not supported by the upstream developers (e.g. upstream only supports macOS versions older than 10.15)
- `:deprecated_upstream`: the project is deprecated upstream and no replacement is pointed to that we can use

> - `:checksum_mismatch`: the checksum of the source for the casks's current version has changed since bottles were built and we cannot find a reputable source or statement justifying this

Reviewer 5: Based on https://github.com/Homebrew/brew/blob/master/Library/Homebrew/deprecate_disable.rb, it looks like the only option for casks is `:discontinued`. This should likely be expanded to include some additionals, for example `:download_unavailable` or `:url_unavailable`

Reviewer 6: Agreed.  We need some additional reasons as mentioned.

Author: @bevanjkay Misread that. Agreed we should add more.

Reviewer 3: Decision at the time was that the formula list was bloated and didn't always apply to casks.

Agreed that we can add additional reasons though this should be a separate PR.

Reviewer 5: The docs do need to be trimmed down to only reference `:discontinued` for the Casks section.
I'm happy to look at expanding the other potential reasons next week when I'm back at home.

These reasons can be specified by their symbols (the comments show the message that will be displayed to users):

```ruby
# Warning: <cask> has been deprecated because it is deprecated upstream!
deprecate! date: "2020-01-01", because: :deprecated_upstream
```

```ruby
# Error: <cask> has been disabled because it does not build!
disable! date: "2020-01-01", because: :deprecated_upstream
```

If these pre-existing reasons do not fit, a custom reason can be specified. Such reasons should be written to fit into the sentence `<cask> has been deprecated/disabled because it <reason>!`.

A well-worded example of a custom reason would be:

```ruby
# Warning: <cask> has been deprecated because it fetches unversioned dependencies at runtime!
deprecate! date: "2020-01-01", because: "fetches unversioned dependencies at runtime"
```

A poorly-worded example of a custom reason would be:

```ruby
# Error: <cask> has been disabled because it invalid license!

> disable! date: "2020-01-01", because: "invalid license"

Reviewer 4: Could be a few more here:

```ruby
:licence_invalid
:license_unknown 
:license_incompatible
```

Reviewer 5: We don't track licenses for casks

Reviewer 4: 👍 This suggestion could also apply to the formula section below.

# Deprecating, Disabling and Removing Casks

There are many reasons why casks may be deprecated, disabled or removed. This document explains the differences between each method as well as explaining when one method should be used over another.

## Overview

These general rules of thumb can be followed:

- `deprecate!` should be used for casks that _should_ no longer be used.
- `disable!` should be used for casks that _cannot_ be used.
- Casks that are no longer acceptable in `homebrew/cask` or have been disabled for over a year _should_ be removed.

## Deprecation

If a user attempts to install a deprecated cask, they will be shown a warning message but the install will proceed.

A cask should be deprecated to indicate to users that the cask should not be used and will be disabled in the future. Deprecated casks should continue to be maintained by the Homebrew maintainers if they continue to be installable. If this is not possible, they should be immediately disabled.

The most common reasons for deprecation are when the upstream project is deprecated, unmaintained or archived.

> Casks should only be be deprecated if at least one of the following are true:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Casks should only be deprecated if at least one of the following are true:
```

- the cask does not install on any of our supported macOS versions
- the cask has outstanding CVEs

> - the cask has [zero installs in the last 90 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/90d/)

Reviewer 3: We currently have a reason of `:discontinued` (upstream EOL) which matches none of these conditions.

Author: @Bo98 then we can adjust the messaging we use until we add more conditions. Can you suggest a wording change if you consider this feedback blocking?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Casks should only be be deprecated if at least one of the following are true:

- the cask does not install on any of our supported macOS versions
- the cask has outstanding CVEs
- the cask has [zero installs in the last 90 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/90d/)
- the software installed has been discontinued upstream
```

Reviewer 8: yeah, adding an entry specifying deprecation by the upstream makes sense to me.

----

I wonder if we should also converge the usage into `:unmaintained` (more straightforward and same as `core`)

To deprecate a cask, add a `deprecate!` call. This call should include a deprecation date in the ISO 8601 format and a deprecation reason:

```ruby
deprecate! date: "YYYY-MM-DD", because: :reason
```

> The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the project or version became (or will become) deprecated. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be deprecated, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will not become deprecated until that date. This can be useful if the upstream developers have indicated a date when the project or version will stop being supported. Do not backdate the `date` parameter as it causes confusion for users and maintainers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the deprecation period should begin, which is usually today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will not become deprecated until that date. This can be useful if the upstream developers have indicated a date when the project or version will stop being supported. Do not backdate the `date` parameter as it causes confusion for users and maintainers.
```

The `because` parameter can be a preset reason (using a symbol) or a custom reason. See the [Deprecate and Disable Reasons](#deprecate-and-disable-reasons) section below for more details about the `because` parameter.

## Disabling

If a user attempts to install a disabled cask, they will be shown an error message and the install will fail.

A cask should be disabled to indicate to users that the cask cannot be used and will be removed in the future. Disabled cask are those that could not be installed successfully any longer.

The most common reasons for disabling a cask are:

> - it cannot be installed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- it cannot be installed on any of our supported macOS versions
```

- it has been deprecated for a long time
- the upstream URL has been removed

> Popular casks (e.g. have more than 300 [analytics installs in the last 90 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/90d/)) should not be disabled without a deprecation period of at least six months even if e.g. they do not install on all macOS versions.

Reviewer 3: This is a bit of special case for casks which doesn't apply to formulae, but:

```suggestion
Popular casks (e.g. have more than 300 [analytics installs in the last 90 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/90d/)) should not be disabled without a deprecation period of at least six months unless they cannot be installed on all macOS versions and issue is unable be fixed (e.g. download URL no longer works and a mirror cannot be sourced).
```

The reason why I suggest this is because if a cask is not installable it's going to error anyway so there's no difference between a deprecation and a disable.

For formulae however, this is rarely true given bottles exist.

> Unpopular casks (e.g. have fewer than 300 [analytics installs in the last 90 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/90d/)) can be disabled immediately for any of the reasons above e.g. they cannot be installed.
> They can be manually removed three months after their disable date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unpopular casks (e.g. have fewer than 300 [analytics installs in the last 90 days](https://formulae.brew.sh/analytics/cask-install/90d/)) can be disabled immediately for any of the reasons above.
They can be manually removed three months after their disable date.
```

To disable a cask, add a `disable!` call. This call should include a deprecation date (in the ISO 8601 format) and a deprecation reason:

```ruby
disable! date: "YYYY-MM-DD", because: :reason
```

The `date` parameter should be set to the date that the reason for disabling came into effect. If there is no clear date but the cask needs to be disabled, use today's date. If the `date` parameter is set to a date in the future, the cask will be deprecated until that date (on which the cask will become disabled).

The `because` parameter can be a preset reason (using a symbol) or a custom reason. See the [Deprecate and Disable Reasons](#deprecate-and-disable-reasons) section below for more details about the `because` parameter.

## Removal

> A cask should be removed if it does not meet our criteria for [acceptable casks](Acceptable-Casks.md), does not install, or has been disabled for over a year.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A cask should be removed if it does not meet our criteria for [acceptable casks](Acceptable-Casks.md) or has been disabled for over a year.
```

We have indicated above that "cannot be installed" should be `disable!` rather than instant removal.
